
Chocolate/Almond Biscotti

Alternative Chocolate/Hazelnut Biscotti: 

- Replace almonds with 3/4 cup toasted hazelnuts, chopped coarse
- Omit almond extract


large bowl
medium bowl
small bowl
cookie sheet
sharp serrated knife
two spoons for mixing and spreading

6 tablespoons cocoa powder
2 teaspoons instant coffee
1 1/4 cup sugar
2 cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1/4 teaspoon salt
4 large eggs
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1 teaspoon almond extract
1/2 cup toasted almonds (whole or slivered)

If using whole almonds, chop them up to roughly 1/4" size pieces.
If using raw almonds, toast them under broiler until light brown.


Grease a large cookie sheet.

In a medium bowl, put 3 tablespoons sugar (taken out of the 1 1/4 cups), 
cocoa, instant coffee, and mix with a few tablespoons of water 
into a smooth chocolate paste.  Mix in 2 egg yolks, saving the 
2 egg whites in a small bowl.  The cocoa mix will now have 
the consistency of thick chocolate syrup.

To the 2 saved egg whites, mix in 2 more whole eggs, vanilla, almond extract.

In a large bowl, mix flour, remaining sugar, baking powder, baking soda, salt.

Mix a few tablespoons of this flour mix into the cocoa syrup, 
until it thickens so that it no longer flows under its own weight,
but can still be spread around easily with a spoon.  It will stiffen
somewhat as it rises from the baking soda and powder.

Add the egg mixture to the flour mixture, and mix thoroughly.
It should have the consistency of wet cookie dough.  Adjust with 
more flour or water as needed.  Add the almonds and mix thoroughly.


Generously sprinkle flour on a 1 foot square area of countertop.
Spread half of the almond mix into a 4" x 8" rectangle, oriented north-south.
Spread half of the cocoa mix evenly on top of the almond mix.

Starting at the 4" south end, roll up the dough rectangle into a log.
It will elongate somewhat as it's being rolled up -- this is OK.
Sprinkle more flour if the log sticks to the countertop or fingers.
Extend the log east-west into a roughly 12-16" length, either 
by rolling or simply by careful stretching with fingertips.
Sprinkle on more flour as needed.

The log will be too soft to lift in one piece.  Therefore...
Using a greased knife, cut the log into 4-6 manageable pieces.
By rolling each piece onto and off of a large greased spatula,
reassemble all the pieces on the cookie sheet.

Make another log with the remaining almond and chocolate dough,
and transfer to the cookie sheet.  Flatten the dough logs to roughly
3/8" thickness.  Thinner dough gives longer, more slender biscotti.

Bake at 325F for 20 minutes.

Remove from oven, and let cool.
Using a sharp serrated knife, slice the logs diagonally
into 1/2" thick slices.  Separate the standing slices
to let air circulate between them.

Bake at 300F until the yellowish dough gets just a hint of browning.
This should take 25-35 minutes.  Try one for donneness if necessary.
Warm biscotti out of the oven will still be somewhat chewy -- they will 
get crisp during cooling.

Let cool, and store in airtight container.


-----------------------------
Suggestions/comments

You can substitute 2 tablespoons of very strong brewed coffee for the 
instant coffee and water, or just omit the coffee if not available.

Recipe is relatively sweet.  Reduce sugar to 1 cup for less sweet biscotti.

Consistency of the almond or hazelnut dough is a tradeoff:
1) Dry dough is easy  to handle, but gives denser  and tougher biscotti.
2) Wet dough is messy to handle, but gives lighter and crisper biscotti.
Adjust consistency with water or flour as necessary.  
The consistency of the cocoa dough is less critical.
